The Pioneer Press’ police reporter, Mara Gottfried, and I have spent the last few weeks digging into data on gun-related incidents in St. Paul the last few years in order to put some details behind anecdotal reports from the cops that these incidents have gone up recently.

Our story, showing gun violence is up 65 percent in the first five months of this year compared to the average for the same time period, comes on the heels of several tragic incidents in St. Paul and Minneapolis where young children were killed by stray bullets.

This is actually the second time Mara and I have tackled gun violence data in St. Paul during the seven years we’ve worked together. The first story, back in May 2006, found reports of gunshots had increased 23 percent during the first four months of the year compared to the previous year.

For this year’s story, I chose to compare the most recent time period to a three-year average for the same time period (using 2008 to 2010). Looking at each month of the past year (June 2011 to May 2012) compared to the three-year-average for each month showed a stark pattern that gun violence was more than double the normal rate, particularly during our unseasonably warm winter months. I chose the three-year average (rather than comparing to the previous year) in order to account for weird fluctuations that sometimes pop up in a given month.

To go with the story, we created an interactive map that allows users to explore the nearly 3,000 incidents reported to St. Paul Police between January 1, 2008 and June 13, 2012. Users can zoom into neighborhoods, or even search by a particular street, to see what’s happening where they live or work. (The map is built using Google Fusion Tables) Each incident includes the date, location and type.

Getting the data from the police was relatively easy. Mapping it, not so much. The addresses were not standardized and sometimes didn’t appear to be correct (there were 113 incidents we couldn’t map due to faulty addresses). Many of the faulty ones were listed as intersections but had two street names that don’t actually intersect. Others were problematic because it needed a direction (i.e. North or South), but didn’t have one. I spent many hours standardizing the street names and trying to resolve problematic addresses. Ending up with only113 that couldn’t be mapped is actually a pretty good result considering the difficulties with the data.